%!TEX root = ../thorn-moor.tex

Earlier I did mention that I was impressed with the long green
blacksmith/wheelwright shed. The length of this shed was used on a seasonal
basis. The end of April to June would find me as a young apprentice spending
many hours grinding combs and cutters for the farmers and shearers that sheared
sheep on the farms by contract. August would find me at the far end mending
canvas conveyors, a brittle strap of corn binders. The forge area was used all
season as some problems were needed to be solved immediately. Some work could
be listed and kept over for the cold winter days such as the sharpening of drag
tines. It was on such occasions that I received the lesson of my life. One day
the boss, Mr Saunders, said that as we had saved up several units of drags to
have pointed and sharpened he felt it was an ideal time to complete the job
particularly as the water work team was not busy and he could let one of the
men free to attend Whiddon Down and help me by turning the forge handle whilst
I carried out the blacksmithing. The man in question was called Bill Allen.
Normally with the water team of plumbers he was a ‘Man Friday' who carried out
general labouring work such as digging holes and trenches as required. He
tended to be overlooked by his team, probably due to his position with them. We
started the day together as planned --- Bill turning the wind vane handle and I
heating up and sharpening the multitudes of drag tines and rebuilding the
units. With pleasant conversation and a steady work pace we found the day's
labour was nearing an end by 3.30 pm. Suddenly Bill said ``Mike would you like
me to show you how to forge some metal and stone cutting chisels?'' The answer
was of course, ``Yes''. From that moment of time it was magical to watch as
Bill selected some metal from our spare metal stock, selecting particularly old
horse rake tines for the high quality steel content. I turned the forge handle
while Bill worked his magic in constructing these very fine tools on the anvil.
It transpired in the conversation that followed that afternoon that Bill Allen
had been a blacksmith in the Plymouth dockyard over the war years carrying out
very skilful work as a blacksmith laying the submarine keels and framework. Due
to the heavy bombing experience at night his nerve had finally broken and he
came out of the dockyard and moved house from Plymouth to Chagford to be in the
quiet of the countryside and chose to work for C J Saunders in a
non-responsible job. I shall never forget Bill Allen and his quiet kindness to
me in demonstrating his very fine blacksmith skills. So never underestimate the
man that stands before you. He could have a wonderful story to tell. Nature
over power and manmade equipment. Charlie Endacott and I were charged to
investigate and prepare a water turbine unit located in its turbine house near
the River Teign in a valley under Castle Drogo in the parish of Drewsteignton.
Charlie Endacott was a lad 12 months older than I and had joined C J Saunders
the same time as myself and had served the term of apprenticeship to the end of
his time. So we both must have been active and experienced lads. I use the
term ‘must have been' as if not it would have been ‘up the road'. The water
turbine unit was bolted to a long face plate bolted with a series of moveable
turbine speed controls with a 4 inch second shaft coming through a gland
packing to a sturdy pedestal carrying the overheating bearing, then attached
next to the bearing was a 3 ton flywheel keyed to the shaft which coupled to a
15 kw generator and continued through a glass covered governing system
manufactured by David Brown, the well-known tractor manufacturer, to monitor
the speed vein      and finished with an identical bearing pedestal. In total
the length from the turbine wall face to the outer pedestal was approximately 9
feet. It was acknowledged that as this unit had been running without stopping
for year after year the complete turbine component should be dismantled and
cleaned free of rotting leaves that had passed through the many water filters
and form a very hard unshapely surface which would cause a reduction of
performance. In respect of the overheating pedestal bearing it was noticed that
the tiled floor was breaking up and distorting caused by an external tree root
that had been growing for decades and had expanded and lifted the drive shaft
electric alternator and a 3 ton flywheel out of alignment. One must wonder at
the power of nature as this needed immense power to lift the total weight of
equipment together while ripping out the securing bolts from the floor. The
problems were corrected by digging a trench from the offending tree, under the
house foundations to the end of the expanding root that finished some 2 feet
past the lifted bearing block refilling with ballast and re-tiling the floor.
The operation was completed by dismantling the water turbines and laboriously
removing the build up of solid leaf mould. We left the equipment working and
from that day I have heard no adverse report. In the season following the
agricultural world took on an adventurous roll. In my earlier years I had been
involved with the old standard Fordson. Everything was basic but practical ---
multi plate metal clutch plates that acted as a clutch and brake combined,
white metal Ford main bearings, a conrod bearing that required the skill of
scraping with white metal scraping knife and final fitment with skims, gearbox
and transmission filled with SAE 140 gear oil requiring the warming of the 5
gallon can on the workshop stove to enable the content to commence to flow and
normally if Wellworthy cord piston rings were installed as that was the popular
request in those days. With too snug a fitting of the white metal main and
connecting rod bearings and Wellworthy piston it was the normal practice to use
2 men with both hands on a length of off cut galvanised water pipe to keep the
engine rotating whilst it coughed and spluttered life into what appeared to be
a lifeless lump of cast iron. In more extreme measures were sometimes put into
action when a spare tractor in the yard and was driven in line and a spare
threshing belt was connected to each tractor threshing pulley pulling the yard
tractor or power tractor engine at a steady slow speed with both threshing
pulleys engaged and the main clutch of the power tractor gingerly engaged. This
condition had its advantages for should the rebuild start up and then falter
the drive tractor would keep up engine speed and momentum. It must be
remembered that very few old Fordson tractors would have a temperature gauge so
working temperature and overheating was total guesswork and if you had just
rebuilt the engine yourself, perhaps it was not unusual practice to fill the
radiator run the engine at a third speed then install the filler water hose in
the radiator filler, undo the water drain and adjust the filler hose to match
the drain flow. This practice is not compatible with today's engineering and
technology but there twas! It got the job done. Some workshop practices were
trial and error and would leave one like a 007 drink stirred and shaken. One
particular incident came to mind which left me in this condition. Geoff the
main workshop mechanic was attempting to carry out a repeat soldering repair to
a Fordson Major fuel tank of twin fuels one main TVO tank and one small petrol
tank combined. I was working on another repair in the same little workshop when
Mr Saunders came through and in his endeavours to help took the blow torch from
Geoff's hands and said with authority, at the same time turning up the heat of
the torch, ``We need to get this solder to run on the very hot parent metal''.
Suddenly there was a massive boom in our working area became filled with a
swirling yellow flame. I stood in shock but was able to see 2 figures running
through the open door with their heads about 2 feet off the ground. Their body
actions mirrored the escaping method of a headmaster running from angry bees
mentioned earlier in this story. I grabbed and extinguished the burning
wreckage to just steaming metal. Mr Saunders and Geoff gingerly looked through
the door expecting me to look like an old burnt out church candle. Thankfully
all was well. I did feel shaky and my hair had been singed. Something good had
revealed itself after this dangerous accident that the internal construction of
the fuel tank was not like our imagination had envisaged. To correct this type
of fault would result in a radical change of approach. Extra labour needed and
extra steam cleaning for safety. I am not saying the repair is impossible but
to accomplish a guaranteed satisfactory repair a very high cost of preparation
would result in a heavy repair cost to an old fuel tank.
